Add migration from legacy StrataKit guide (#1280)
iTwin/stratakit: apps/website/src/content/docs/guides/migration-from-legacy-stratakit.mdx

:::note
Migration to StrataKit MUI can be done gradually, since both libraries can coexist in the same project.
:::

## Migration steps

<Steps>

1. **Set up StrataKit MUI**

   Follow the [set up StrataKit MUI guide](/getting-started/develop/) to install the necessary dependencies and set up your project.

2. **Replace `@stratakit/foundations` with `@stratakit/mui`**

   Replace the [`Root`](/reference/foundations/Root) component from `@stratakit/foundations` with the `Root` component from `@stratakit/mui`.
   This unlocks the ability to use [MUI components](https://mui.com/material-ui/all-components/) within the `Root`. Legacy StrataKit components nested within the `Root` will continue to work, enabling gradual migration.

   ```diff
   - import { Root } from "@stratakit/foundations";
   + import { Root } from "@stratakit/mui";
   ```

   Replace usage of [`Icon`](/reference/foundations/Icon) component from `@stratakit/foundations` with the `Icon` component from `@stratakit/mui`.
   Continue using icons from the `@stratakit/icons` package.

   ```diff
   - import { Icon } from "@stratakit/foundations";
   + import { Icon } from "@stratakit/mui";
   ```

>    Once all direct and indirect usage of `@stratakit/foundations` has been replaced it is safe to remove the dependency.

Reviewer: This still needs to be addressed.

```suggestion
   Once all direct usage of `@stratakit/foundations` has been replaced, it is safe to remove the dependency.
```

   ```console

>    npm uninstall @stratakit/foundations

Reviewer: nit: should use `remove` alias instead of `uninstall`? (works with `pnpm` and `yarn`)

---
title: Migrating from legacy StrataKit
description: Learn how to migrate from legacy StrataKit components to StrataKit MUI
---

import { Steps } from "@astrojs/starlight/components";

> This guide provides the necessary steps for migrating from legacy StrataKit packages (`@stratakit/foundations`, `@stratakit/bricks`, and `@stratakit/structures`) to [Material UI](https://mui.com/material-ui/getting-started/) based StrataKit implementation.

Reviewer: Slight rephrasing
- removed mention of `@stratakit/structures`
- packages → components
- "Material UI based" → "MUI-based"

```suggestion
This guide provides the necessary steps for migrating from legacy StrataKit components (e.g. `@stratakit/bricks`) to [MUI](https://mui.com/material-ui/getting-started/)-based StrataKit implementation.
```

  | ------------- | ---------------- |
  | `"neutral"`   | `"success"`      |
  | `"info"`      | `"info"`         |
  | `"positive"`  | `"success"`      |
  | `"attention"` | `"warning"`      |
  | `"critical"`  | `"error"`        |

- Update value of [`variant`](/reference/structures/Banner#Banner.variant) prop.

  | Before      | After        |
  | ----------- | ------------ |
  | `"outline"` | `"outlined"` |

### Button

- Change [`tone`](/reference/bricks/Button#Button.tone) prop to [`color`](https://mui.com/material-ui/api/button/#button-prop-color) prop.

  | `tone` value | `color` value |
  | ------------ | ------------- |
  | `"neutral"`  | `"secondary"` |
  | `"accent"`   | `"primary"`   |

- Update value of [`variant`](/reference/bricks/Button#Button.variant) prop.

  | Before      | After         |
  | ----------- | ------------- |
  | `"solid"`   | `"contained"` |
  | `"outline"` | `"outlined"`  |
  | `"ghost"`   | `"text"`      |

- Use [`startIcon`](https://mui.com/material-ui/api/button/#button-prop-startIcon) and [`endIcon`](https://mui.com/material-ui/api/button/#button-prop-endIcon) props to [display icons](/components/button/#icons).

### Checkbox

> - Use [`FormControlLabel`](https://mui.com/material-ui/api/form-control-label/) component to label the checkbox.

Reviewer: I find it strange that some of these sections don't even mention how to migrate the component itself. Suggested change: add "Replace the _ component from `@stratakit/_` with the _ component from `@mui/material`" under _every_ component's subheading.

I can see the equivalent components are listed in the table above, but that requires scrolling. Headings in long pages are often visited in isolation (e.g. either clicking a link or from the table of contents), so it's useful to repeat this information.

Also, mentioning the package name helps understand the whole thing better, especially since StrataKit components are spread across multiple packages.

Author: [Add replacement bullet points](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1280/commits/8e3159edc886d10598397dd8dbaa0f54d7c5190d)

Migration to StrataKit MUI can be done gradually, since both libraries can coexist in the same project.
:::

## Migration steps

<Steps>

1. **Set up StrataKit MUI**

   Follow the [set up StrataKit MUI guide](/getting-started/develop/) to install the necessary dependencies and set up your project.

2. **Replace the `Root` component**

   Replace the [`Root`](/reference/foundations/Root) component from `@stratakit/foundations` with the `Root` component from `@stratakit/mui`.

   ```diff
   - import { Root } from "@stratakit/foundations";
   + import { Root } from "@stratakit/mui";
   ```

   This unlocks the ability to use [MUI components](https://mui.com/material-ui/all-components/) within the `Root`. Existing StrataKit components nested within the `Root` are expected to work without any changes, enabling gradual migration.

3. **Replace `Icon` component**

   Replace usage of [`Icon`](/reference/foundations/Icon) component from `@stratakit/foundations` with the `Icon` component from `@stratakit/mui`.

   ```diff
   - import { Icon } from "@stratakit/foundations";
   + import { Icon } from "@stratakit/mui";
   ```

   Continue using icons from the `@stratakit/icons` package.

> 4. **Uninstall `@stratakit/foundations`**

Author: [Reduce the number of steps](https://github.com/iTwin/stratakit/pull/1280/commits/ccff8dc5bf05ca769af982c40d6a5e93d38508d9)

   ```console
   npm uninstall @stratakit/foundations
   ```

5. **Replace `@stratakit/bricks` components**

   Replace the usage of components from `@stratakit/bricks` with their MUI counterparts.

   ```diff
   - import { Button } from "@stratakit/bricks";
   + import { Button } from "@stratakit/mui";
   ```

   Refer to the [use MUI components](#use-mui-components) below for the component mapping and additional guidance.

6. **Uninstall `@stratakit/bricks`**

   Once all usage of `@stratakit/bricks` has been replaced it is safe to remove the dependency.

   ```console
   npm uninstall @stratakit/bricks
   ```

7. **Continue using `@stratakit/structures`**

   Replace the usage of [`AccordionItem`](/reference/structures/AccordionItem/), [`Banner`](/reference/structures/Banner/) and [`Chip`](/reference/structures/Chip/) components from `@stratakit/structures` package with their MUI counterparts.

   ```diff
   - import { Chip } from "@stratakit/structures";
   + import { Chip } from "@mui/material";
   ```

   Continue using other components from [`@stratakit/structures`](/reference#structures) package, as they are not affected by the migration to StrataKit MUI.

   :::note

>    It is safe to remove the `@stratakit/structures` dependency if all usage has been replaced.

Reviewer: This not is not super useful and gives the impression that `@stratakit/structures` is something that consumers should aim to remove all usages of, which is not true (unlike `@stratakit/bricks`).

- Change [`tone`](/reference/structures/Banner#Banner.tone) prop to [`severity`](https://mui.com/material-ui/api/alert/#alert-prop-severity) prop.

  | `tone` value  | `severity` value |
  | ------------- | ---------------- |
  | `"neutral"`   | `"success"`      |
  | `"info"`      | `"info"`         |
  | `"positive"`  | `"success"`      |
  | `"attention"` | `"warning"`      |
  | `"critical"`  | `"error"`        |

- Update value of [`variant`](/reference/structures/Banner#Banner.variant) prop.

  | Before      | After         |
  | ----------- | ------------- |
  | `"solid"`   | `"contained"` |
  | `"outline"` | `"outlined"`  |
  | `"ghost"`   | `"text"`      |

### Button

- Change [`tone`](/reference/bricks/Button#Button.tone) prop to [`color`](https://mui.com/material-ui/api/button/#button-prop-color) prop.

  | `tone` value | `color` value |
  | ------------ | ------------- |
  | `"neutral"`  | `"secondary"` |
  | `"accent"`   | `"primary"`   |

- Update value of [`variant`](/reference/bricks/Button#Button.variant) prop.

  | Before      | After        |
  | ----------- | ------------ |

>   | `"outline"` | `"outlined"` |

Reviewer: Why were the other variants removed?

- Remove [`dot`](/reference/bricks/IconButton#IconButton.dot) prop. Wrap the icon in a [`Badge`](https://mui.com/material-ui/api/badge/) component to [display a badge](/components/iconbutton/#badge).
- Remove [`labelVariant`](/reference/bricks/IconButton#IconButton.labelVariant) prop. Use a visually hidden label, without a wrapper [`Tooltip`](https://mui.com/material-ui/api/tooltip/).
- Remove [`variant`](/reference/bricks/IconButton#IconButton.variant) prop. Only `"ghost"` variant is supported by MUI component.

### ProgressBar

- Remove unsupported [`size`](/reference/bricks/Progress#Progress.ProgressBar.size) prop.
- Change [`tone`](/reference/bricks/Progress#Progress.ProgressBar.tone) prop to [`color`](https://mui.com/material-ui/api/linear-progress/#linear-progress-prop-color) prop.

  | `tone` value | `color` value |
  | ------------ | ------------- |
  | `"neutral"`  | `"secondary"` |
  | `"accent"`   | `"primary"`   |

### Radio

- Use [`FormControlLabel`](https://mui.com/material-ui/api/form-control-label/) component to label the radio control.
- Use `RadioGroup` component to group multiple radio buttons.

### Select

> - Use [`NativeSelect`](https://mui.com/material-ui/api/native-select/) to replace the [`Select.HtmlSelect`](/reference/bricks/Select#Select.HtmlSelect) component.

Reviewer: Why `NativeSelect` instead of `Select`? Does it support everything we need?
